PART I. CHINOOK-ENGLISH.

~A.~

~Ah-ha~, _adv._ Common to various tribes. _Yes._ Expression of simple
assent. On Puget Sound, E-EH.

~Ah'n-kut-te~, or ~Ahn-kot-tie~, _adv._ Chinook, ANKUTTI. _Formerly;
before now._ With the accent prolonged on the first syllable, _a long time
ago._ Ex. Ahnkutte lakit sun, _four days ago;_ Tenas ahnkutte, _a little
while since._

~Al-ah~, _interj._ Expression of surprise. Ex. Alah mika chahko! _ah,
you've come!_

~Al-kie~, _adv._ Chinook, ALKEKH. _Presently; in a little while; hold on;
not so fast._

~Al'-ta~, _adv._ Chinook, ALTAKH. _Now; at the present time._

~A-mo'-te~, _n._ Chinook, AMUTE; Clatsop, KLABOTE. _The strawberry._

~An-ah~, _interj._ An exclamation denoting pain, displeasure, or
depreciation. Ex. Anah nawitka mika halo shem, _ah, indeed you are without
shame._ On Puget Sound, Ad-de-dah.

~Ats~, _n._ Chinook, idem; Yakama, ATSE (Pandosy). _A sister younger than
the speaker._ In the original, only when used by her brother.

~A-yah-whul~, _v._ Chihalis, ATAHWUL. _To lend; borrow._

~Ay-keh-nam.~See EH-KAH-NAM.


~B.~

~Be-be~, _n., v._ French. A word used towards children; probably a
repetition of the first syllable of BAISER. _A kiss; to kiss._

~Bed~, _n._ English, idem. _A bed._

~Bit~, or ~Mit~, _n._ English, BIT. _A dime or shilling._

~Bloom~, _n._ English, BROOM. _A broom._ Mamook bloom, _to sweep._

~Boat~, _n._ English, idem. _A boat,_ as distinguished from a canoe.

~Bos'-ton~, _n., adj._ _An American; American._ A name derived from the
hailing-place of the first trading-ships to the Pacific. Boston illahie,
_the United States._

~Bur-dash~, _n._ Can. French, BERDACHE (Anderson). _An hermaphrodite._ The
reputation of hermaphroditism is not uncommon with Indians, and seems to
attach to every malformation of the organs of generation. The word is of
very limited use.


~C.~

~Cal'-li-peen~, _n._ French, CARABINE. _A rifle._

~Ca-nim~, _n._ Chinook, EKANIM. _A canoe._ Canim stick, _the cedar, or
wood from which canoes are usually made._

~Ca-po'~, _n._ French, CAPOT. _A coat._

~Chah'-ko~, _v._ Nootka, Clayoquot, CHAKO; Tokwaht, TCHOKWA. _To come; to
become._ Ex. Kansik mika chahko? _when did you come?_ Chahko kloshe, _to
get well._

~Chak chak~, _n._ Chinook, idem. _The bald eagle_ (by onoma.), from its
scream. Of only local use on the lower Columbia.

~Chee~, _adv., adj._ Chinook, T'SHI. _Lately; just now; new._ Chee nika
ko, _I have just arrived._ Hyas chee, _entirely new._

~Chet'-lo~, or ~Jet'-lo~, _n._ Chihalia, CHETLOKH. _An oyster._ Used on
the lower Columbia.

~Chet-woot~, _n._ Nisqually, idem. _A black bear._ Used only on Puget
Sound.

~Chik'-a-min~, _n., adj._ Tokwaht, TSIKAMEN; Nootka, SICKAMINNY (Jewitt);
SEEKEMAILE (Cook). _Iron; metal; metallic._ T'kope chikamin, _silver;_ pil
chikamin, _gold_ or _copper._ Chikamin lope, _wire; a chain._

~Chik-chik~. See TSIK-TSIK.

~Chil-chil~. See TSIL-TSIL.

~Chitsh~, _n._ Chihalis, TSHITSH. _A grandmother._

~Chope~, _n._ Chihalis, TSHUP. _A grandfather._

~Cho'-tub~, _n._ Nisqually, idem. _A flea._ Used on Puget Sound.

~Chuck~, _n._ Nootka, CHAUK (Cook); CHAHAK, _fresh water_ (Jewitt);
Chinook, TLTSUK (Shortess); Clatsop, TL'CHUKW. _Water; a river or stream._
Salt chuck, _the sea;_ skookum chuck, _a rapid;_ solleks chuck, _a rough
sea;_ chuck chahko _or_ kalipi, _the tide rises or falls;_ saghilli _and_
keekwillie chuck, _high_ and _low tide._

~Chuk-kin~, _n., v._ Chihalis, TSUKAEN. _To kick._ Of local use only.

~Close.~ See KLOSE.

~Cly~, _v._ English. _To cry._

~Cole~, _adj._ English, COLD. Cole illahie, _winter;_ icht cole, _a year;_
cole sick waum sick, _the fever and ague._

~Comb~, _n._ English. _A comb._ Mamook comb, _to comb;_ mamook comb
illahie, _to harrow._

~Coo'-ley~, _v._ French, COUREZ, imp. of COURIR. _To run._ Cooley kiuatan,
_a race-horse;_ yahka hyas kumtuks cooley, _he can,_ i.e., _knows how to
run well._

~Coop'-coop~, _n._ Chinook, idem. _The smaller sized dentalium or shell
money._ See HYKWA.

~Co'-sho~, _n._ French, COCHON. _A hog; pork._ Siwash cosho, _a seal;_
literally, _Indian pig._

~Cul'-tus~, _adj._ Chinook, KALTAS. _Worthless; good for nothing; without
purpose._ Ex. Cultus man, _a worthless fellow;_ cultus potlatch, _a
present or free gift;_ cultus heehee, _a jest; merely laughing;_ cultus
nannitsh, _to look around;_ cultus mitlite, _to sit idle; to do nothing;_
cultus klatawa, _to stroll._ _Ques._ What do you want? _Ans._ Cultus,
i.e., _nothing._


~D.~

~De-late~, or ~De-lett~, _adj., adv._ French, DROITE. _Straight; direct;
without equivocation._ Ex. Klatawa delett, _go straight;_ delett wauwau,
_tell the truth._

~Di-aub~, or ~Yaub~, _n._ French, DIABLE. _The devil._ Sometimes used
combined with the article, as LEJAUB.

~D'ly~, or ~De-ly~, _adj._ English, DRY. Chahko dely, _to become dry;_
mamook dely, _to dry, v. a._

~Doc'-tin~, _n._ English. _A doctor._

~Dol'-la~, or ~Tah-la~, _n._ English. _A dollar; money._ Chikamin dolla,
_silver;_ pil dolla, _gold;_ dolla siaghost, _spectacles._


~E.~

~Eh-kah-nam~, _n._ Chinook, EKANAM. _A tale or story._ Used only on the
Columbia river. Often erroneously pronounced Ay-keh-nam.

~Eh-ko-li~, _n._ Chinook, EKOLI. _A whale._

~Ee'-na~, _n._ Chinook, IINA. _A beaver._ Eena stick (literally, _beaver
wood_), _the willow._

~Ee'-na-poo~, or ~In-a-poo~, _n._ Chinook, INAPU. _A louse._ Sopen inapoo,
_a flea._

~Ek'-keh~, _n._ Chinook, EKKE. _A brother-in-law._

~E'-la-han~, or ~E-lann~, _n._ Chihalis, YELAAN. _Aid; assistance; alms._
Mamook elann, _to help._

~E'-lip~, or ~El'-ip~, _adv._ Chihalis, ILIP. _First; before._ The
superlative. Klatawa elip, _go before;_ elip lolo chuck, _in the first
place carry water;_ elip kloshe, _best;_ elip tilikum, _n._ (literally,
_the first people), a race of beings who inhabited the world before the
Indians._

~E-li'-te~, _n._ Chinook, ILAITEKH. _A slave._

~E-salt'h~, or ~Ye-salt'h~, _n._ Probably Wasco. _Indian corn or  maize._


~G.~

~Get-up~, or ~Ket-op~, _v._ English. _To get up; rise._

~Glease~, _n._ English, GREASE, _fat, grease, or oil._ Hyeu glease, _very
fat;_ too-toosh glease, _butter._ See, also, LAKLES.


~H.~

~Hah-lakl~, _adj._ Chinook, HALAKL. _Wide; open._ Ex. Mamook hahlakl la
pote, _open the door;_ chahko hallakl (as of the woods), _to open out;
become less dense._

~Haht-haht~, _n._ Nisqually, HATHAT. _The mallard duck._

~Hak-at-shum~, _n._ English. _A handkerchief._

~Ha'-lo~, _adj._ Quaere u. d. not Chinook. _None; absent. Q._ Halo salmon
mika? _have you no fish? A._ Halo, _none. Q._ Kah mika papa? _where is
your father? A._ Halo, _he is out._ Halo wind, _breathless; dead;_ halo
glease, _lean;_ halo ikta, _poor; destitute._

~Haul~, _v._ English, idem. _To haul or pull._ Used with the active verb
mamook; as, mamook haul.

~Hee'-hee~, _n._ By onoma., HIHI (Hale). _Laughter, amusement._  Cultus
heehee, _fun;_ mamook heehee, _to amuse;_ heehee house, _any place of
amusement,_ as a tavern, bowling-alley, &c.

~Hoh-hoh~, _n., v._ Chinook (by onoma.), HOKHHOKH. _To cough._

~Ho-ku-melh~, _v._ Chihalis, idem. _To gather; to glean,_ as grain. Of
local use.

~Hool-hool~, _n._ Chinook, KHOLKHOL; Klikatat. KHOILKHOIL. _A mouse._ Eyas
hoolhool, _a rat._

~House~, _n._ English. _A house._ Mahkook house, _a store;_ Boston house,
_an American-built house,_ as distinguished from a lodge.

~Howh~, _interj._ HAUKH. _Turn to; hurry._

~How'-kwutl~, _adv._ Chinook, HAUKATLH. An expression of inability. Ex.
Howkwutl nika klatawa? _how could I go?_

~Hul-lel'~, _v., n._ Chinook, idem. _To shake._ Used with the verb mamook,
as, mamook hullel, it becomes active.

~Hul-o-i-ma~, _n., adj._ Chinook, S'HULLOYIBA. _Other; another;
different._ Ex. Huloima tilikum, _a different tribe or people;_ hyas
huloima, _very different._

~Humm~, _n., v._ Jargon. _A stink or smell; to stink._ An invented word.
Humm opootsh, _a skunk._

~Hunl'-kih~, _adj._ Chinook, HUNLKEKH. _Curled or curly; knotted;
crooked._

~Huy-huy~, _n., v._ Canadian French, HUI-HUI. _A bargain or exchange; to
barter or trade._ Ex. Huyhuy la sille, _change the saddle;_ huyhuy tumtum,
_to change one's mind._ Mr. Andersen says this is a cant word of the
Canadians, signifying a hasty exchange. Its origin has been suggested in
_oui oui,_ yes yes.

~Hwah~, or ~Hwah-wa~, _interj._ Denotes surprise or admiration; also
earnestness.

~Hy'-ak~, _adv._, also used as imperative. Chinook, AI-AK. _Swift; fast;
quickly; hurry; make haste._

~Hy-as'~, _adj., adv._ Probably corrupted from the following. _Large;
great; very._ The general term for size. Hyas tyee, _a great chief;_ hyas
mahcook, _a great price; dear;_ hyas ahnkutte, _a long time ago;_ hyas
kloshe, _very good._

~Hy-iu~, _n., adj._ Nootka, IYAHISH (Jewitt); Tokwaht, AIYA. Jewitt also
gives HYO as the name for _ten._ _Much; many; plenty; enough._ Term of
quantity or multitude. Hyiu tilikum, _a crowd; many people;_ hyiu
muckamuck, _plenty to eat;_ tenas hyiu, _some; a, few;_ wake hyiu, _not
many_ or _not much._

~Hy'-kwa~, or ~Hy'-a-kwa~, _n._ Nootka, HAIHWA (i-whaw, Jewitt). _The
dentalium; the shell money or wampum of the Pacific coast._ It is used in
strings of a fathom long; shells of not more than forty to the fathom
being of full size, and the value increasing in proportion to their
length. The smaller sizes are called _coop-coop_ (q.v.). These shells were
formerly obtained by the Indians of the west coast of Vancouver Island,
and passed in barter as low down as California, and eastward to the
Blackfoot country.


~I.~

~Ik'-kik~, _n._ Chinook, IKKIK._A fish-hook._

~Ik-poo'-ie~, _v._ Chinook, IKHPUI. _To shut._ Ikpooie la pote, _shut the
door;_ mamook ikpooie, _to surround;_ ikpooie kwillan, _deaf._

~Ikt~, or ~Icht~, _adj._ Chinook, IKHT. _One; once._ Used also as the
indefinite article. Ikt man, _a man;_ ikt-ikt man, _some one or other;
here and there one;_ ikt nika klatawa kopa yakka house, _I have been once
to his house._

~Ik'-tah~, _pron._ Chinook, IKTA. _What._ Iktah okook, _what is that?_
iktah mika tikegh, _what do you want?_ iktah, _well, what now?_

~Ik'-tah, _n._ From the foregoing. _A thing; goods; merchandise;
clothing._ Hyiu tenas iktah, _a great many trifles._ The use of the same
word for _what_ and for _things,_ has been noticed in some other languages
of this coast.

~Il'-la-hie~, _n._ Chinook, ILAHEKH. _The ground; the earth; dirt._ Tipso
illahie, _prairie;_ saghallie illahie, _mountains, or high land; heaven;_
hyiu illahie kopa, _dirty_ (literally, _much dirt upon_).

~In'-a-ti~, or ~Een-a-ti~, _prep., adv._ Chinook, INATAI. _Across;
opposite to; on the other side of._ Inati chuck, _on the other side of the
river;_ klatawa inati, _to cross over._

~Ip'-soot~, _v. a., v. n._ Chinook, ALHUPSO. _To hide one's self, or any
thing; to keep secret._ Ipsoot klatawa, _to steal off;_ ipsoot wau-wau,
_to whisper._

~Is'-ick~, _n._ Chinook, ISIK. _A paddle._ Mamook isick, _to paddle._

~Is'-ick stick~, _n._ Chinook and English. _The ash._ Literally,
_paddle-wood._

~Is'-kum~, _v._ Chinook, idem. _To take; take hold of; hold; get._ Iskum
okook lope, _hold on to that rope;_ mika na iskum? _did you get it?_

~It'-lan~, or ~It'h-lan~, _n._ Chinook, ITHLANA. _A fathom; the length of
the extended arms._

~It'-lo-kum~, _n._ Chinook, idem; Chihalis, SETLOKUM. _The game of
"hand,"_--a common amusement. Mamook itlokum, _to gamble._

~Itl'-wil-lie~, _n._ Chinook, ETLWILI. _The flesh; meat of any animal._
Konaway nika itlwillie sick, _all my flesh is sore._

~Its'-woot~, or ~Its'-hoot~, _n._ Chinook, EITSHHUT. _A black bear._
Itshoot paseesie, _thick dark cloth or blankets._


~K.~

~Kah~, _adv._ Chinook, KAKH. _Where; whither; whence._ Kah mika mitlite?
_where do you live?_ konaway kah, _everywhere;_ kah-kah, _here and there._

~Kah'-kah~, _n._ Chinook and Nisqually (by onoma.), SKAKA. _A crow._

~Kah-kwa~, _adv._ Nootka; Tokwaht, ACHKO. _Like; similar to; equal with;
as._ Kahkwa nika tumtum, _so I think_ (literally, _such [is] my heart_);
kahkwa hyas nika, _as large as I;_ kahkwa spose, _as if;_ kloshe kahkwa,
_that is right; good so._

~Kah'-na-way~, _n._ Chinook, T'KANAWE. _Acorns._ Kahnaway stick, _the
oak._ Used only on the Columbia river.

~Kahp-ho~, _n._Chinook, idem. _An elder brother, sister, or cousin._

~Kah-ta~, _adv._ Chinook, KATA. _How; why._ Kahta mika mamook okook? _why
do you do that?_ kahta mika chahko? _how did you come?_ kahta mika? _what
is the matter with you?_ pe kahta? _and why so?_

~Kal-ak-a-lah-ma~, _n._ Chinook, OKALAKALAMA. _A goose._ Used on the lower
Columbia river.

~Kal-a-kwah-tie~, _n._ Chinook, KALAKWATI; Clatsop, KL'WHELATL. _The inner
bark of the cedar_ (thuja); _the petticoat, or skirt, formerly worn by
women, and often made of strands of bark._ Kalakwahtie stick, _the
cedar-tree._

~Ka-li'-tan~, _n._ Chinook, TKLAITAN. _An arrow; shot; a bullet._ Kalitan
le sac, _a quiver; a shot-pouch._

~Kal-lak'-a-la~, or ~Kul-luk'-ul-la~, _n._ Chinook, KALAKALA. _A bird._

~Kam-ass~, or ~La-kam-ass~, _n._ Nootka. _The Scilla esculenta,_--a
bulbous root used for food by the Indians. Jewitt gives CHAMASS as the
Nootka for _fruit,_ also for _sweet, or pleasant to the taste._

~Kam-ooks~, _n._ Chinook, KLKABOKES. _A dog._ Kahkwa kamooks, _like a dog;
beastly._

~Ka-mo'-suk~, _n._ Chinook, idem. _Beads._ Tyee kamosuk (chief beads),
_the large blue glass beads._

~Kap-su-al-la~. Quaere u. d. _To steal._ Kapsualla klatawa, _to steal
away;_ kapsualla mamook, _to do secretly._

~Kat-suk~, or ~Kot-suk~, _n._ Chinook, idem. _The middle or centre of any
thing._

~Kau'-py~, _n._ English. _Coffee._

~Ka-wak~, _v._ Chihalis, KAUAK. _To fly._ Not in general use.

~Kaw-ka-wak~, _adj._ Chinook, KAKAWAK. _Yellow, or pale green._

~Kee-kwil-lie~, _prep._ Chinook, KIK'HWILI. _Low; below; under; beneath;
down._ Mamook keekwillie, _to lower;_ mitlite keekwillie, _to set down;
put under._ Not used in the sense of "down stream."

~Keep'-wot~, _n._ Chinook, OKWEPOWA; Yakama, KAPUS, _a pin_ (Pandosy). _A
needle; the sting of an insect; a thorn._ Shoes keepwot, _an awl._

~Keh'-loke~, _n._ Chinook, idem. _A swan._ Of local use only.

~Keh'-see~, or ~Ki'-su~, _n._ Chinook, EKESO. _An apron._

~Keh-wa~, _adv._ Quaere u. d. _Because._ Not in common use.

~Kel'-a-pi~, or ~Ka-la-pi~, _v._ Chinook, KELAPAI. _To turn; return;
overturn; upset._ Kelapi canim, _to upset a canoe;_ hyak kelapi, _come
back quickly;_ kelapi kopa house, _go back to the house;_ mamook kelapi,
_to bring, send, or carry back;_ kelapi tumtum, _to change one's mind._

~Kes'-chi~, or ~Keh-tsie~. Chinook, KUKHTSI (Anderson). _Notwithstanding;
although._ Keschi yakka mamook kahkwa, _although he did so._ Not in common
use.

~Ket'-ling~, or ~Kit'-ling~, _n._ English. _A kettle; can; basin, &c._

~Kil-it'-sut~, _n._ Chinook, OKWILIKTSHUT. _Flint; a bottle; glass._

~Kim'-ta~, or ~Kim-tah'~, _prep._ Chinook, KIMTA. _Behind; after;
afterwards; last; since._ Klatawa kimtah, _go behind;_ nika elip, pe yakka
kimtah, _I first, and he afterwards;_ okook kimtah, _the one behind;_
kimtah nika nannitsh mika, _since I saw you._

~King Chautsh~, _adj._ English, KING GEORGE. _English._ King chautshman,
_an Englishman._

~Ki'-nootl~, or ~Ki'-noos~, _n._ Chinook, EKAINUTL. _Tobacco._

~Kish-kish~, _v._ Chinook, idem. _To drive,_ as cattle or horses.

~Kiu'-a-tan~, _n._ Chinook, IKIUATAN. Cooley kiuatan, _a race-horse;_
stone kiuatan, _a stallion._

~Ki'-wa~, _adj._ Wasco, KAIWA (Shaw). _Crooked._ Of only local use.

~Ki'-yah~, _n._ Chihalis, KAIYAKH. _Entrails._

~Klah~, _adj._ Chinook, KLAKH. _Free or clear from; in sight._ Ex. Chee
yakka klah, _now he is in sight;_ klatawa klah, _to escape, as a
prisoner;_ chahko klah (of seed), _to come up;_ (of the woods), _to open
out;_ (of the weather), _to clear up;_ mamook klah, _to uncover._ Mr.
Anderson gives as the original meaning, _to open out or appear._

~Klah-hanie'~, or ~Klagh-anie'~, _adv._ Chinook, KLAKHANI. _Out of doors;
out; without._ Ex. Mamook klaghanie okook, _put that out;_ klatawa
klaghanie, _to go out._

~Kla'-how-ya.~ The ordinary salutation at meeting or parting. _How do you
do? good-bye;_ as, klahowya sikhs, _good-bye, friend._

~Kla-how-yum~, _adj., n._ Chinook, KLAHAUIA. _Poor; miserable; wretched;
compassion._ Ex. Hyas klahowyum nika, _I am very poor;_ mamook klahowyum,
_to take pity on; give alms; be generous._

The salutation above given probably originated in some whining reply to
the first whites, and a distinction has since arisen between the two modes
of spelling, which is, however, purely arbitrary.

~Klah-wa~, _adv._ Chinook, KLAWAKH. _Slow; slowly._ Ex. Klatawa klahwa,
_go slowly._

~Klak~, _adv._ Chinook, KLAKW. _[To take] off._ Ex. Mamook klak stone
kiuatan, _to castrate a horse;_ mamook klak l'assiette, _take off the
plates;_ klak kopa wayhut, _get out of the road._

~Klak-sta~, or ~Kluk'-sta~, _pron._ Chinook, T'KLUKSTA. Ex. Klaksta mamook
okook? _who made or did that?_ halo klaksta, _no one._

~Klak-wun~, or ~Kleh-kwan~, _v._ Chihalis, KLAKWUN._To wipe, or lick._
Klakwun l'assiette, _to wipe a plate._

~Klale~, or ~T'klale~, _adj._ Chinook, TLEHL. _Black, or dark blue, or
green._

~Klap~, _v._ Chinook, KLAP. _To find._ Ex. Mika na klap mika kiuatan? _did
you find your horse?_ klap tenas, _to be with child._

~Kla'-pite~, _n._ Chinook, KLIPAIT. _Thread; twine._

~Klas-ka~, or ~Klus'-ka~, _pron._ Chinook, KLUSKA. _They; thine; them._

~Klat'-a-wa~, _v._ Nootka, KLATTUNWAH (Jewitt); Nittinat, KLATOeUKH. _To
go._ Klatawa teahwit, _to walk; go on foot;_ klatawa kopa kiuatan, _to
ride;_ klatawa kopa boat, _to sail;_ mamook klatawa, _to send._

~Kla-whap~, _n._ Chinook, KLHUAP. _A hole._ Mamook klawhap, _to dig a
hole._

~Klem'-a-hun~, _v._ Chihalis, idem. _To stab; to wound; to dart; to cast
as a spear; to hook or gore as an ox._ Nika klemahun samun, _I spear
salmon._

~Klihl~, or ~Klilt~, _adj._ Chinook, KLIHL. _Bitter._ Not of universal
use. Mr. Hale makes it KLITL, _sour._

~Klik'-a-muks~, _n._ Chinook, KLIKABUKS. _Blackberries,_ or more properly
_dewberries._

~Klik'-wal-lie~, or ~Kloke'-wal-lie~. Chinook, KLIKWALI. _Brass wire; an
armlet or bracelet of brass wire._ Mr. Anderson gives the original meaning
as simply _brass._

~Klim-in'-a-whit~, _n., v._ Chinook, KLIMINAWHUT. _A lie; to lie._ Hyas
kumtuks kliminawhit, _he is a great liar_ (literally, _he knows well how
to lie_).

~Klim'-min~, or ~Klimmin-klimmin~, _adj._ Chinook, TKLEMIN-TKLEMIN. _Soft;
fine in substance._ The reduplication denotes the diminutive, but in
jargon it is generally used singly. Ex. Klimmin sapoleel, _flour;_ klimmin
illahie, _mud; marshy ground;_ mamook klimmin, _to soften as by dressing a
skin._

~Klip~, _adj._ Chinook, KELIPE; Chihalis, KLUPUTL; Nisqually, KLEP. _Deep;
sunken._ Klip chuck, _deep water;_ klip sun, _sunset._

~Klis'-kwiss~, _n._ Chinook, idem. _A mat._

~Klogh-klogh~, _n._ Chinook, OKLOKHKLO. _Oysters._ The word is common to
the Puget Sound tribes, as well as to the Chinooks.

~Klo-nass~, _adv._ Chinook, idem. Expression of uncertainty or doubt.
_Perhaps; I don't know; may be so; who knows?_ Equivalent to the Spanish
_quien sabe._ Ex. Klonass nika klatawa, _perhaps I shall go. Q._ Kah mika
kahpho? _where is your brother? A._ Klonass, _I don't know._

~Klone~, _adj._ Chinook, TKLON. _Three._

~Klook~, _adj._ English. _Crooked._ Klook teahwit, _broken legged; lame._

~Klootch-man~, _n._ Nootka and Tokwaht, KLUTSMA. _A woman;_ a female of
any animal. Tenas klootshman, _a girl;_ klootchman kiuatan,  _a mare._

~Klose~, or ~Kloshe~, _adj., adv._ Nootka; Tokwaht, KLOHTL; Makah,
KLOTELO; Nisqually, KLOB. _Good; well; well enough._ Kloshe nannitsh,
_look out; take care;_ hyas kloshe, _very well._

~Klose-spose~. Nootka, KLOHTL; English, SUPPOSE. _Shall or may I; let me._
Ex. Klose-spose nika mamook pia okook? _shall I cook that?_ (literally,
_[is it] good that I make cook that?_).

~Klugh~, or ~Klugh-klugh~. Chinook, KLUKH. _To tear._ Mamook klugh
illahie, _to plough_ (literally, _to tear the ground_).

~Kluk-ulh'~, or ~Klak-alh'~, _adj._ Chihalis, TLUKUTLH. _Broad or wide,_
as of a plank.

~Ko~, _v._ Chinook, idem. _To reach; arrive at._ Chee klaska ko, _they
have just come;_ kansih nesika ko kopa Nisqually? _when shall we reach
Nisqually._

~Ko'-ko~, _v._ Chinook (by onoma). _To knock._ Koko stick, _a
wood-pecker._

~Kok'-shut~, _v._ Nootka, KAKHSHETL; Klaokwat, KWACHITL. In the original,
_dead._ _To break; broken; to beat._ Hyas kokshut, _broken to pieces._

~Kon'-a-way~, _adj._ Chinook, KANAWE. _All; every._ Klaska konaway
klatawa, _they have all gone;_ konaway tilikum, _everybody;_ konaway kah,
_everywhere._

~Koo'-sah~, or ~Ko-sah~, _n._ Chinook, EKOSAKH. _The sky._ Only used on
the Columbia.

~Ko'-pa~, _adv., prep._ Chinook, idem. _To; in; at; with; towards; of;
about; concerning; there or in that place._ Ex. Kopa nika house, _at my
house;_ lolo okook kopa mika, _take that home with you_ (equivalent to the
French _chez vous_); cultus kopa nika, _it is nothing to me. Q._ Kah okook
lope? _where is that rope? A._ (motioning with the chin towards the place)
Kopah.

~Ko-pet'~, _v., adv._ Chinook, idem. _To stop; leave off; enough._ Kopet
wau-wau, _stop talking;_ kopet ikt, _only one;_ kopet okook, _that's all;_
wake siah kopet, _nearly finished;_ kopet tomalla, _day after to-morrow._

~Kow~, _v._ Chinook, KAU-KAU. _To tie; to fasten._ Kow mika kiuatan, _tie
your horse;_ ikt kow, _a bundle._

~Kull~, _adj._ Chinook, K'HUL-K'HUL. _Hard in substance; difficult._
Chahko kull, _to become hard;_ mamook kull, _to harden; to cause to become
hard;_ hyas kull spose mamook, _it is very hard to do so;_ kull stick,
_oak or any hard wood._

~Kul-lagh'~, or ~Kul-lagh'-an~, _n._ Chihalis, KULLAKH; Lummi, KULLUKHAN.
_A fence; a corral, or inclosure._ Kullagh stick, _fence rails._ In the
original, it meant the stockade with which Indian houses are often
surrounded.

~Kum'-tuks~, or ~Kame-taks~, _v._ Nootka, KOMMETAK (Jewitt); Tokwaht,
KUMITUKS; Clayoquot, KEMITAK. _To know; understand; be acquainted with;
imagine; believe._ Mamook kumtuks, _to explain; teach;_ hyas kumtuks
solleks (literally, _well to understand anger), to be passionate;_ kopet
kumtuks, _to forget;_ halo kumtuks, _stupid; without understanding;_ (of a
horse) hyas yakka kumtuks cooley, _he can run fast_ (literally, _he knows
well to run_); kumtuks kliminawhit, _to be a liar; to understand lying;_
nika kumtuks okook tyee, _I know that chief;_ nika kumtuks Klikatat
wau-wau, _I understand the Klikatat language._

~Kun'-a-moxt~, _adj._ Chinook, KONAWAY MOXT. _Both; together_ (literally,
_all two_). Kunamoxt kahkwa, _both alike._

~Kun'-sih, Kan'-sih, Kun'-juk, Kun'-jie~, _adv._ Chinook, KUNSEUKH. _How
many; when; ever._ Kunsih tilikum mitlite? _how many people are there?_
kunsih mika klatawa? _when do you go?_ wake kunsih, _never;_ mamook
kunsih, _to count._

~Kush'-is~, _n._ Chihalis, KOSHIS. _Stockings._ In the original, any
elastic article of dress. Not in general use.

~Kwah'-ne-sum~, _adv._ Chinook, KWANISUM; Yakama, KWALISIM. _Always;
forever._

~Kwah'-nioe~, _n._ Klikatat, KWADDIS. _A whale._

~Kwahta~, _n._ English. _The quarter of a dollar._ The quarter of any
number is usually expressed in Jargon by _tenas sitku,_ i.e., _a small
half._

~Kwah'-tin~. See YAKWAHTIN.

~Kwaist~, or ~Kweest~, _adj._ Chinook, KWAITST. _Nine._

~Kwa-lal'-kwa-lal'~, _v._ Chinook, KWULLIL-KWULLIL. _To gallop._

~Kwal'h~, _n._ Chihalis, KWATLH. _An aunt._

~Kwann~, _adj._ Chinook, KWAN-KWAN. _Glad._ According to Mr. Anderson, it
means a custom or habit. It is used by some in this sense as _tamed_ or
_broken,_ as of a horse (McCormick). KWAL is Nisqually for _tame._

~Kwass~, _adj._ Chinook, idem. _Fear; afraid; tame._ Mamook kwass, _to
frighten; to tame._

~Kwates~, or ~Kwehts~, _adj._ Chihalis, KWETS. _Sour._

~Kweh-kweh~, _n._ Chinook, OKWEKWE (by onoma). _A mallard duck._ Used
chiefly at mouth of the Columbia.

~Kwek-wi-ens~, _n._ Chihalis, idem. _A pin._ Of limited use.

~Kweo-kweo~, _n._ Chinook, T'KWEO-KWEO. _A ring; a circle._

~Kwetlh~, _adj._ Chihalis, idem. (Anderson). _Proud._ Not in general use.

~Kwin'-num~, _adj._ Chinook, KWENEM. _Five._

~Kwish~, or ~Kweesh~, _interj._ Refusing any thing contemptuously.
Equivalent to "_No you don't._" Used on the lower Columbia.

~Kwit'-shad-ie~, _n._ Nisqually, KWUTSHDIE. _The hare or rabbit._ Confined
to Puget Sound.

~Kwo-lann'~, or ~Kwo-lah'-nie~, _n._ Chihalis, KWOLAN; Nisqually, KWILANI.
_The ear._ Halo kwolann, or, ikpooie kwolann, _deaf._

~Kwulh~, or ~Kwult~, _v._ Chinook, KWULT'H. _To hit; to wound with an
arrow or gun; to strike with a slick or stone; or in any manner without
cutting; to hit._

~Kwun'-nun~, _n._ Chihalis, idem. _A count; numbers._ Ex. Mamook kwunnun,
_to count._ Of merely local use.

~Kwutl~, _adj._ Chinook, idem. Literally, _fast._ _To push or squeeze,_ as
in packing; hyas mamook kwutl, _haul tight._


~L.~

~La-bleed'~, _n._ French, LA BRIDE. _A bridle._

~La-boos'~, _n._ French, LA BOUCHE. _The mouth; mouth of a river._ Moxt
laboos, _the forks of a river._

~La-boo-ti'~, _n._ French, LA BOUTEILLE. _A bottle._

~La-ca-lat'~, _n._ French, LA CAROTTE. _A carrot._

~La-ca-set'~, _n._ French, LA CASETTE. _A box, trunk, or chest._

~La-clo-a~, _n._ French, LA CROIX. _A cross._

~Lagh~, _v._ Chinook, LAKH. _To lean; to tip, as a boat; to stoop; to bend
over, as a tree._ Wake mika lagh kopa okook house, _don't lean against
that house._

~La-gome~, _n._ French, LA GOMME. _Pitch; glue._ La gome stick,
_light-wood; the pitch-pine._

~La-gwin'~, or ~La-kween'~, _n._ Quaere u. d. _A saw._

~La-hal.~ See SLAHAL.

~Lahb~, _n._ French, L'HERBE. The arbutus _uva ursi,_ the leaves of which
are used in smoking, alone or mixed with tobacco.

~La-hash~, _n._ French, LA HACHE. _An axe or hatchet._

~La-kam-mas'.~ See KAMASS.

~Lak'-it~, or ~Lok'-it~, _adj._ Chinook, LAKT. _Four; four times._ Lakit
taht-lelum, _forty._

~La'-kles~, _n._ French, LA GRAISSE. _Fat; oil._ See, also, GLEASE.

~La-lah~, _v._ Chinook, LAKHWHOLA. _To cheat; fool; to practise jokes._
Mamook lalah, _to make fun._

~La-lahm'~, or ~La-lum'~, _n._ French, LA RAME._An oar._ Mamook lalahm,
_to row._

~La-lang~, _n._ French, LA LANGUE. _The tongue; a language._

~La-leem'~, _n._ French, LA LIME. _A file._

~La-messe'~, _n._ French, idem. _The ceremony of the mass._

~La-mes-tin~, or ~La-mo-tchin~, _n._ French, LA MEDECINE. _Medecine,_ not
including magic.

~Lam'-mi-eh~, or ~Lam-mi-i~, _n._ French, LA VIEILLE. _An old woman._

~La-mon-ti~, or ~La-mo-ti~, _n._ French, LA MONTAGNE. _A mountain._

~La-peep'~, _n._ French, LA PIPE. _A tobacco-pipe._ Lapeep kullakala
(literally, the "pipe-bird"), _the band-tailed eagle,_ as its feathers
were used to ornament the pipe stems.

~La-pehsh~, _n._ French, LA PERCHE. _A pole; the setting-pole of a boat or
canoe._

~La-pel-lah~, _v._ Quaere if from the French, LE FOYER. Mamook lapellah,
_to roast before the fire._

~La-pelle'~, _n._ French, LA PELLE. _A shovel or spade._

~La-pe-osh'~, _n._ French, LA PIOCHE. _A mattock; a hoe._

~La-piege~, _n._ French, LA PIEGE. _A trap._ Eena la piege, _a
beaver-trap._

~La-plash~, _n._ French, LA PLANCHE. _A board._

~La-po-el'~, _n._ French, LA POELE. _A frying-pan._ Mamook lapoel, _to
fry._

~La-pome~, _n._ French, LA POMME. _An apple._

~La-pool'~, _n._ French, LA POULE. _A fowl; poultry._ Siwash lapool, _the
grouse._

~La-poo-shet'~, _n._ French, LA FOURCHETTE. _A fork._

~La-pote~, _n._ French, LA PORTE. _A door._

~La-sanjel~, _n._ French, LA CINGLE. _A girth; a sash; a belt._

~La-see~, _n._ French, LA SCIE. _A saw._

~La-sell'~, _n._ French, LA SELLE. _A saddle._

~La-shal-loo~, or ~La-shal-lee~, _n._ French, LA CHARRUE. _A plough._

~La-shan-del~, _n._ French, LA CHANDELLE. _A candle._

~La-shase~, _n._ French, LA CHAISE. _A chair._

~La-shen'~, _n_ French, LA CHAINE. _A chain._

~Las-siet'~, _n._ French, L'ASSIETTE. _A plate._

~La-sway~, _n., adj._ French, LA SOIE. _Silk; silken._

~La-tahb~, _n._ French, LA TABLE. _A table._

~La-tet'~, _n._ French, LA TETE. _The head._ Pil latet, _red-headed._

~La-tlah'~, _n._ French, TRAIN; as, "ne faites pas de train." (Anderson).
_A noise._ Mamook latlah, _to make a noise._

~La-wen'~, _n._ French, L'AVOINE. _Oats._

~La-west'~, _n._ French, LA VESTE. _A waistcoat._

~Lazy~, _adj._ English, idem. _Lazy._

~Le-bah-do~ (often pronounced lab'-a-do), _n._ French, LE BARDEAU. _A
shingle._

~Le-bal'~, _n._ French, idem. _A ball; bullet._ Tenas lebal, _shot._

~Le-bis'-kwie~, _n._ French, LE BISCUIT. _Biscuit; crackers; hard bread._

~Le-blau'~, _n., adj._ French, LE BLOND. _A sorrel horse; chestnut
colored._

~Le-clem'~, _n., adj._ French, LE CREME. _Cream-colored; a cream-colored
or light dun horse._

~Le-cock'~, _n._ French, LE COQ. _A cock; a fowl._

~Le-doo'~, _n._ French, LE DOIGT. _A finger._

~Le-gley~, _n., adj._ French, LE GRIS, or English GRAY, with French
article. _A gray horse; gray._

~Le-jaub'~. See DIAUB.

~Le-kleh~, _n._ French, LE CLEF. _A key._ Mamook le kleh, _lock the door._

~Le-kloo'~, _n._ French, LE CLOU. _A nail; nails._

~Le-koo'~, _n._ French, LE COU. _The neck._

~Le-ky'e~, _n., adj._ Mr. Anderson derives this from a Canadian word
_caille,_ meaning _a piebald horse._ In its jargon use, it means, also, _a
spot, spotted,_ or _speckled;_ as, lekye salmon, _the spotted or winter
salmon_ (_salmo canis,_ Suckley).

~Le-lo'-ba~, _n._ French, LE RUBAN. _A ribbon._

~Le-loo'~, _n._ French, LE LOUP. _A wolf_ (the large wolf).

~Le-mah~, or ~Leh-ma~, _n._ French, LA MAIN. _The hand; the arm._ Kloshe
lemah, _the right_ (literally, _the good hand_); potlatch lemah, _shake
hands._

~Le-mah-to~, _n._ French, LE MARTEAU. _A hammer._

~Le-mel'~, _n._ French, LE MULET. _A mule._

~Le-mo'-lo~, _n., adj._ French Canadian, LE MORON; undoubtedly a
corruption of MARRON, _a runaway negro._ _Wild; untamed._ It applies to
men as well as animals, as, for instance, to the tribes which have had no
intercourse with the settlements.

~Le-moo'-to~, or ~Lam'-mu-to~, _n._ French, LES MOUTONS. _Sheep._

~Le-pan'~, _n._ French, LE PAIN. _Bread; raised or light bread._

~Le-pee'~, _n._ French, LE PIED. _The feet._

~Le-pish'-e-mo~, _n._ Quaere u. d. _The saddle-blanket and housings of a
horse._

~Le-plet~, _n._ French, LE PRETRE. _A priest._

~Le-pwau'~, _n._ French, LES POIS. _Peas._

~Le-sak'~, _n._ French, LE SAC. _A bag; a pocket._

~Le-sap'~, or ~Le-zep'~, _n._ French, LES OEUFS. _An egg; eggs._

~Le-see-blo~, _n._ French, LES EPERONS. _Spurs._

~Le-see-zo~, _n._ French, LE CISEAU. _Scissors._

~Le-sook~, _n._ French, LE SUCRE. _Sugar._

~Le-tah~, _n._ French, LE DENT. _The teeth._

~Le-whet'~, _n._ French, LE FOUET. _A whip._ Mamook lewhet, _to whip._

~Lice~, _n._ English. _Rice._

~Lik-pu'-hu~, or ~Lik'-po~, _n._ (Hale.) _An elder sister._ Mr. Hale gives
this as a Chinook word. If so, it is probably a corruption of KUP'HO. It
is not used in Jargon.

~Lip'-lip~, _v._ By onoma. (Hale). _To boil_ Mamook liplip, _to make, or
cause to boil._

~Lo-lo~, _v._ Chinook, idem. Originally, to carry a child on the back. In
Jargon, used in a more extended sense. _To carry; to load._ Lolo kopa
tsiktsik, _to carry in a cart._ Mamook lolo kopa canim, _to load into a
canoe._

~Lo-lo'~, _adj._ Chinook, LOWULLO. _Round; whole; the entire of any
thing._ Lolo sapeleel, _whole wheat;_ mamook lolo, _to roll up_ (Shaw).

~Lope~, _n._ English, ROPE. _A rope._ Tenas lope, _a cord;_ skin lope, _a
raw hide, riata, or thong._

~Luk'-ut-chee~, or ~La-kwit-chee~, _n._ French, LA COQUILLE. (?) _Clams._
Used chiefly on Puget Sound.

~Lum~, _n._ English, RUM. _Spirits of any sort._


~M.~

~Mah-kook~, _v., n._ Nootka, MAKUK; Nittinat and Tokwaht, idem; Makah,
BAKWATL. _To buy or sell; trade or exchange; a bargain._ As their buying
and selling was merely barter, the same word always answered for both
operations. Kah mika mahkook okook calipeen? _where did you buy that
rifle?_ hyas mahkook, _dear;_ tenas mahkook, _cheap._

~Mah-kook-house.~ _A trading-house or a store._

~Mah-lie~, _v._ Nisqually. _To forget._ Of local use on Puget Sound.

~Mahsh~, _v. a._ French, MARCHER. _To leave; to turn out; to throw away;
to part with; remove._ Ex. Mahsh chuck kopa boat, _bail the boat out;_
mahsh okook salmon, _throw away that fish;_ mahsh maika capo, _take off
your coat;_ mahsh! (to a dog) _get out!_ mahsh tenas, _to have a child; to
be delivered;_ yakka mahsh tum-tum kopa nika, _he has given me his orders,
or told me his wishes;_ mahsh kow, _to untie;_ mahsh stone, _to castrate._

~Mah-sie~, _v._ French, MERCIE. _Thank you._

~Maht-lin-nie~, _adv._ Chinook, MATLINI. _Off shore._ (In boating), _keep
off!_ (if on land), _towards the water._

~Maht-wil-lie~, _adv._Chinook, MATHWILI. _In shore; shoreward._ (As a
command), _keep in;_ (on land), _towards the woods, or the interior._

~Ma-lah, _n._ Chinook, MALAGH. _Tinware; crockery; earthenware._

~Mal-i-eh, _v._ French, MARIER. _To marry._

~Ma'-ma~, _n._ English, MAMMA. _A mother._

~Mam'-ook~, _v. a._ Nootka, MAMUK. _To make; to do; to work._ It is the
general active verb, and is used largely in combination with nouns and
other verbs; as, mamook chahko, _make to come, fetch;_ mamook kelipai,
_bring or send back;_ mamook isick, _to paddle;_ mamook illahee, _to dig._

~Man~, _n._ English, idem. _A man; the male of any animal._ Ex. Man
moolock, a _buck elk;_ tenas man, _a young man or boy._

~Mel-a-kwa~, or ~Mal-a-kwa~, _n._ French, MARANGOUIN. (Anderson.) _A
mosquito._

~Mel'-ass~, _n._ French, MELASSE. _Molasses._

~Mem'-a-loost~, _v., n., part._ Chinook, MEMALUST. _To die; dead._ Mamook
memaloost, _to kill._

~Me-sah-chie~, _adj._ Chinook, MASACHI. _Bad; wicked._

~Me-si'-ka~, _pron._ Chinook, MESAIKA. _You; your; yours._

~Mi'-ka~, _pron._ Chinook, MAIKA. _Thou; thy; thine._

~Mi'-mie~, _adv._ Chinook, MAIAMI. _Down stream._

~Mist-chi'-mas~, _n._ Quaere u. d. _A slave._ Dr. Scouler gives this word
as Nootka and Columbian. Mr. Hale makes it Chinook. It is certainly,
however, neither Chinook nor Chihalis; and Jewitt gives _kakoelth_ as
Nootka, while I find the Makah word _kotlo,_ and the Nittinat _kotl._

~Mit-ass~, _n._ Cree, MITAS. (Anderson.) _Leggings._ A word imported by
the Canadian French.

~Mit'-lite~, _v._ Chinook, MITLAIT. _To sit; sit down; stay at; reside;
remain._ It is also used in place of _to have_ and _to be._ Ex. Mitlite
kopa house, _he is in the house;_ mitlite hyiu salmon kopa mika? _have you
plenty of salmon?_ mitlite (_imp._), _sit down;_ cultus mitlite, _to stop
anywhere without particular object;_ mitlite tenas, _to be with child;_
mitlite keekwillie, _to put down._

~Mit'-whit~, _v._ Chinook, AMETWHET. _To stand; stand up._ Mitwhit stick,
_a standing tree; a mast._

~Mokst~, _adj._ Chinook, MAKST. _Two; twice._

~Moo'-la~, _n._ French, MOULIN. _A mill._ Stick moola, _a saw-mill._

~Moo'-lock~, _n._ Chinook, EMULUK. _An elk._ This word, strangely enough,
occurs also in the Koquilth of Humboldt Bay.

~Moon~, _n._ English, idem. _The moon._ Ikt moon, _a month;_ sick moon,
_the wane or old moon._

~Moos'-moos~, _n._ Klikatat, MUSMUS; Chinook, EMUSMUS. _Buffalo; horned
cattle._ The word, slightly varied, is common to several languages. Mr.
Anderson derives it from the Cree word _moostoos,_ a buffalo, and supposes
it to have been imported by the Canadians; but Father Pandosy makes
_musmus_ Yakama.

~Moo'-Sum~, _v., n._ Chihalis, MUSAM. _To sleep; sleep._ Tikegh moosum,
_or_ olo moosum, _to be sleepy_ (literally, _to want, or be hungry for
sleep_); nika hyas moosum, _I slept very sound._

~Mow-itsh~, or ~Mah'-witsh~, _n._ Nootka, MAUITSH (Hale); Nittinat,
MOITSH, _a deer;_ Nootka, MOOWATSH, a _bear_ (Jewitt). _A deer; venison._
Frequently used to signify a wild animal; as, huloima mowitch, _a strange
or different kind of beast._ The meaning given in Jewitt's book is
probably a misprint. Like _moolock,_ an elk, the word is found in the
Koquilth of Humboldt Bay.

~Muck-a-muck~, _n., v._ Quaere u. d. MAKAMAK (Hale). _To eat; to bite;
food._ Muckamuck chuck, &c., _to drink water, or other liquid._ Neither
Chinook nor Chihalis. Mr. Anderson considers it an invented word.

~Mus'-ket~, _n._ English, idem. _A gun or musket._ Stick musket, _a bow._


~N.~

~Na.~ The interrogative particle. Ex. Mika na klatawa okook sun? _do you
go to-day?_ Interrogation is, however, often conveyed by intonation only.

~Na-ah, _n._ Chinook, TLKANAA. _A mother._ (Hale.) Peculiar to the
Columbia, and now in fact obsolete, the Euglish MA'MA being used instead.

~Nah~, _interj._ Common to several languages. _Look here! I say!_ Nah
sikhs! _halloo, friend!_ Also used in common conversation to call
attention to some point not thoroughly understood. In the Yakama language,
it is the sign of the vocative; as, nah tehn! _O man._

~Nan'-itsh~, _v._ Quaere u. d. _To see; look; look for; seek._ Nanitsh!
_look there!_ kloshe nanitsh! _look out! take care!_ cultus nanitsh, _to
look round idly, or from curiosity only._ Mamook nanitsh, _to show._ The
word is neither Chinook nor Chihalis. Dr. Scouler gives _nannanitch_ as
Nootka and Columbian. It is possibly tbe former.

~Nau'-its~, _adv._ Chihalis, NOITSH. Mr. Hale gives this for _off shore;
on the stream._ It means, according to Mr. Anderson, the _sea-beach,_  and
is not properly a Jargon word.

~Na-wit'-ka~, _adv._ Chinook, idem; Klikatat and Yakama, N'WITKA. _Yes;
certainly; yes indeed; to be sure._ Nawitka wake nika kumtuks, _indeed I
don't know._ In answer to a negative question, many Indians use it as
affirming the negative. Ex. Wake mika nanitsh? _did you not see [it]?_
Nawitka, _I did not._

~Nem, _n._ English, NAME. _A name._ Mamook nem, _to name, or call by
name._

~Ne-nam-ooks, _n._ Chinook, ENANAMUKS. _The land otter._

~Ne si'-ka~, _pron._ Chinook, NISAIKA. _We; us; our._

~Ne'-whah.~ Chinook, NIWHA. It seems to be an adverb used, as is often the
case, as a verb, the meaning being _hither, come,_ or _bring it hither._
Ex. Newhah nika nanitsh, _here, let me see it._

~Ni'-ka~, _pron._ Chinook, NAIKA. _I; me; my; mine._

~Nose~, _n._ English, idem. _The nose;_ also, _a promontory._ Boat nose,
_the bow of a boat._


~O.~

~O'-koke~, or ~O'-kook, _pron._ Chinook, OKOeK. _This; that; it._ Iktah
okook? _what is that?_ okook sun, _to-day;_ okook klaksta, _he who;_ okook
klaska, _they_ (being present). It is often abbreviated to _oke;_ as, _oke
sun._

~O'-la-pits-ki~, _n._ Chinook, OOeLPITSKI. (Hale.) _Fire._ Not properly a
Jargon word.

~O'-le-man~, _n., adj._ English, OLD MAN. _An old man; old; worn out._
Hyas oleman kiuatan, a _very old horse._ As regards articles, used in the
sense of worn out.

~Ol'-hy-iu~, _n._ Chinook, OLHAIYU. _A seal._

~O'-lil-lie~, or ~O'-lal-lie~, _n._ Belbella, idem. (Tolmie.) Originally
the salmon berry. Chinook, KLALELLI, _berries in general. Berries._ Shot
olillie, _huckleberries;_ siahpult olillie, _raspberries;_ salmon olillie,
_salmon berries,_ &c. On Puget Sound, always called OLALLIE.

~O'-lo~, _adj._ Chinook, idem. _Hungry._ Olo chuck, _thirsty;_ olo moosum,
_sleepy._

~O'-luk~, _n._ Chihalis, idem. _A snake._

~O'-na~, _n._ Chinook, EONA. _The razor fish or solen; clams._ Used only
at mouth of the Columbia.

~Oos'-kan~, _n._ Chinook. _A cup; a bowl._

~O'-pe-kwan~, _n._ Chinook, OPEKWANH. _A basket; tin kettle._

~O'-pitl-kegh~, _n._ Chinook, OPTLIKE. _A bow._

~O'-pit-sah~, _n._ Chinook, OPTSAKH. _A knife._ Opitsah yakka sikhs _(the
knife's friend), a fork._ The word is also used to denote _a sweetheart._

~O'-poots~, or ~O'-pootsh~, _n._ Chinook, OBEPUTSH, _the fundament._ _The
posterior; the fundament; the tail of an animal._ Boat opoots, _the
rudder;_ opoots-sill, _a breech clout._

~Ote-lagh, _n._ (Hale.) Chinook, OOeTLAKH. _The sun._ Not properly a Jargon
word.

~Ow~, _n._ Chinook, AU. _A brother younger than the speaker._


~P.~

~Pahtl~, _adj._ Chinook, PATL. _Full._ Pahtl lum _or_ paht-lum, _drunk;_
pahtl chuck, _wet;_ pahtl illahie, _dirty;_ mamook pahtl, _to fill._

~Paint~, or ~Pent~, _n., adj._ English, PAINT. Mamook pent, _to paint._

~Papa~, _n._ English, idem. _A father._

~Pa'see-sie~, _n._ Chinook, PASISI. _A blanket; woollen cloth._

~Pa-si'-ooks~, _n., adj._ Chinook, PASISIUKS. _French; a Frenchman._

Mr. Hale supposed this to be a corruption of the French word _Francais._
It is, however, really derived from the foregoing word, PASISI, with the
terminal UKS, which is a plural form applied to living beings. Lewis and
Clarke (vol. ii., p. 413) give _Pashisheooks,_ clothmen, as the Chinook
name for the whites, and this explanation was also furnished me by people
of that tribe. It has since been generally restricted to the French
Canadians, though among some of the tribes east of the Cascade Range, it
is applied indiscriminately to all the Hudson's Bay people.

~Pchih~, or ~Pit-chih~, _adj._ Quaere u. d. _Thin in dimension,_ as of a
board. (Shaw.) Not in common use.

~Pe-chugh~, _adj._ Chinook, PTSEKH. _Green._

~Pee~, _conj._ French, PUIS. (Anderson.) _Then; besides; and; or; but._
Pee weght, _and also; besides which;_ pee nika wauwau wake, _but I say,
No._

~Peh'-pah~, _n._ English, PAPER. _Paper; a letter; any writing._ Mamook
pehpah, _to write._

~Pel'-ton~, _n., adj._ Jargon. _A fool; foolish; crazy._ Kahkwa pelton,
_like a fool;_ hyas pelton mika, _you are very silly._ The Indians adopted
this word from the name of a deranged person, Archibald Pelton, or perhaps
Felton, whom Mr. Wilson P. Hunt found on his journey to Astoria, and
carried there with him. The circumstance is mentioned by Franchere, in his
"Narrative," trans, p. 149.

~Pe-shak'~, or ~Pe-shuk'~, _adj._ Nootka, PESHUK; Nittinat, idem. _Bad._

~Pe-what'-tie~, _adj._ Chinooi, PIHWATI. _Thin,_ like paper, &c.

~Pi'-ah~, _n., adj._ English, FIRE. _Fire; ripe; cooked._ Mamook piah, _to
cook; to burn;_ piah-ship, _a steamer;_ piah olillie, _ripe berries;_ piah
sapolill, _baked bread;_ piah sick, _the venereal disease;_ saghillie
piah, _lightning._

~Pil~, _adj._ Chinook, TLPELPEL. Father Pandosy gives PILPILP, as
signifying _red,_ in the Nez Perce or Sahaptin, also. _Red; of a reddish
color._ Pil illahie, _red clay or vermilion;_ pil dolla, _gold;_ pil
chickamin, _copper;_ pil kiuatan, _a bay or chestnut horse._

~Pil'-pil~, _n._ Jargon. _Blood._ Mahsh pilpil, _to bleed; to menstruate._
Derived from the foregoing.

~Pish~, _n._ English. _Fish._

~Pit-lilh'~, or ~Pit-hlil'~, _adj._ Quaere u. d. _Thick in consistence,_ as
molasses.

~Piu-piu~, _n._ French, PUER, _to stink._ Or from the sound often uttered
expressive of disgust at a bad smell. _A skunk._

~Poh~, _v._ Chinook, idem. By onoma. Mamook poh, _to blow out or
extinguish,_ as a candle.

~Po'-lak-lie~, _n., adj._ Chinook, POLAKLI. _Night; darkness; dark._
Tenas polaklie, _evening;_ hyas polaklie, _late at night; very dark;_
sit-kum polaklie, _midnight_ (literally, _the half night_).

~Po'-lal-lie~, _n._ Quaere French, POUDRE. _Gunpowder; dust; sand._
Polallie illahie, _sandy ground._ The word is certainly neither Chinook
nor Chihalis.

~Poo~, _n._ By onoma. (Hale). _The sound of a gun._ Mamook poo, _to
shoot;_ moxt poo, _a double-barrelled gun;_ tohum poo, _a six-shooter._
Nisqually, OPOO, _to break wind._

~Poo'-lie~, _adj._ French, POURRI. _Rotten._

~Pot'-latch~, or ~Paht'-latsh~, _n., v._ Nootka, PAHCHILT (Jewitt);
PACHAETL, or PACHATI (Cook). _A gift; to give._ Cultus potlatch, _a
present or free gift._

~Pow'-itsh~, _n._ Chinook, PAUITSH. _A crab-apple._

~Puk'-puk~, _n._ Probably an invented word. _A blow with the fist; a
fist-fight._ Mamook pukpuk, _to box; to fight with the fists;_ pukpuk
solleks, _to fight in anger._

~Puss'-puss~, _n._ English. _A cat._ On Puget Sound, pronounced
_pish-pish._ Hyas pusspuss, _a cougar._


~S.~

~Sagh-a-lie~, or ~Sah'-ha-lie~, _adj._ Chinook, SAKHALI; Clatsop,
UKHSHAKHALI. _Up; above; high._ Saghalie tyee (literally, _the chief
above_), _God._ A term invented by the missionaries for want of a native
one.

~Sail~, or ~Sill~, _n._ English, SAIL. _A sail; any cotton or linen
goods._ Mamook sail, _to make sail;_ mamook keekwillie sail, _to take in
sail;_ tzum sail, _printed cloth or calico._   ~Sa-kol'-eks~, or
~Se-kol'-uks~, _n._ Chinook, TSAKALUKS, _leggings._ _Trowsers;
pantaloons._ Keekwillie sakoleks, _drawers._   ~Sal-lal'~, _n._ Chinook,
KLKWUSHALA. (SHELWELL of Lewis and Clarke.) _The sallal berry;_ fruit of
_gualtheria shallon._

~Salmon~, _n._ English, idem. _The salmon; fish generally._ Tyee salmon,
i.e., _chief salmon, the spring salmon (salmo kwinnat,_ Rich.); masahchie
salmon, _a winter species (salmo canis,_ Suckley); tzum salmon, _salmon
trout._

~Salt~, _n., adj._ English, idem. _Salt, or a salt taste._ Salt chuck,
_the sea._   ~San-de-lie~, _n., adj._ French, CENDRE. _Ash-colored._
(Anderson.) _A roan horse; roan-colored._

~Sap'-o-lill~, _n._ Chinook, TSAPELEL. _Wheat, flour, or meal._ Piah
sapolill, _baked bread;_ lolo sapolill, _whole wheat._ The word has been
erroneously supposed to come from the French _la farine._ It is, however,
a true Indian word, and seems common to various Columbia river tribes.
Pandosy gives SAPLIL as Yakama for _bread;_ Lewis and Clarke write it
CHAPELELL.

~Se-ah-host~, or ~Se-agh'-ost~, _n._ Chinook, SIAKHOST, _the face._ _The
face; the eyes._ Halo seahhost, _blind;_ icht seahhost, _one-eyed;_ lakit
seahhost (_four eyes_), or dolla seahhost, _spectacles_.

~Se-ah-po~, or ~Se-ah-pult~, ~n.~ French, CHAPEAU. _A hat or cap._
Seahpult olillie, _the raspberry._

~Shame~, or ~Shem~, _n._ English, idem. _Shame._ Halo shem mika? _arn't
you ashamed of yourself?_

~Shan-tie~, _v._ French, CHANTER. _To sing._

~She-lok'-um~, _n._ Chinook, TSHAILAKUMIT. (Anderson.) _A looking-glass;
glass._

~Ship~, _n._ English, idem. _A ship or vessel._ Stick ship, _a sailing
vessel;_ piah ship, _a steamer;_ ship-man, _a sailor._

~Shoes~, _n._ English, idem. _Shoes; skin shoes; moccasins._ Stick shoes,
_boots or shoes made of leather._

~Shot~, _n._ English, idem. _Shot; lead._ Shot olillie, _huckleberries._

~Shu'-gah~, or ~Shu'-kwa~, _n._ English. _Sugar._

~Shugh~, _n._ Chinook, SHUKHSHUKH. _A rattle._ An imitation doubtless of
the sound. (Anderson.) Shugh-opoots, _a rattlesnake._

~Shut~, _n._ English, SHIRT. _A shirt._

~Shwah-kuk~, _n._ Chihalis, SHWAKEUK. _A frog._

~Si-ah~, _adj._ Nootka, SAIA. _Far; far off._ Comparative distance is
expressed by intonation or repetition; as, siah-siah, _very far;_ wake
siah, _near, not far._ Jewitt gives SIEYAH as the _sky_ in Nootka, which
was perhaps the true meaning, or, more probably, they called the sky "the
afar."

~Si-am~, _n._ Chinook, ISHAIEM. _The grizzly bear._

~Sick~, _adj._ English, idem. _Sick._ Cole sick, _the ague;_ sick tum-tum,
_grieved; sorry; jealous; unhappy._

~Sikhs~, or ~Shikhs~, _n._ Chinook, SKASIKS; Sahaptin, SHIKSTUA.
(Pandosy.) _A friend._ Used only towards men.

~Sin'-a-moxt~, _adj._ Chinook, SINIMAKST. _Seven._

~Si'-pah~, _adj._ Wasco. (Shaw.) _Straight,_ like a ramrod. Of only local
use.

~Sis'-ki-you~, _n._ Cree. (Anderson.) _A bob-tailed horse._

This name, ludicrously enough, has been bestowed on the range of mountains
separating Oregon and California, and also on a county in the latter
State. The origin of this designation, as related to me by Mr. Anderson,
was as follows. Mr. Archibald R. McLeod, a chief factor of the Hudson's
Bay Company, in the year 1828, while crossing the mountains with a pack
train, was over-taken by a snow storm, in which he lost most of his
animals, including a noted bob-tailed race-horse. His Canadian followers,
in compliment to their chief, or "bourgeois," named the place the Pass of
the Siskiyou,--an appellation subsequently adopted as the veritable Indian
name of the locality, and which thence extended to the whole range, and
the adjoining district.

~Sit'-kum~, _n., adj._ Chinook, SITKUM (Anderson); Clatsop, ASITKO. _A
half; apart._ Sitkuni dolla, _half a dollar;_ sitkum sun, _noon;_ tenas
sitkum, _a quarter, or a small part._

~Sit'-lay~, or ~Sit'-li-ay~, _n._ French, LES ETRIERS. (Anderson.)
_Stirrups._

~Sit'-shum~, _v._ Chihalis, idem. _To swim._

~Si'-wash~, _n., adj._ French, SAUVAGE. _An Indian; Indian._

~Skin~, _n._ English, idem. _Skin._ Skin shoes, _moccasins;_ stick skin,
_the bark of a tree._

~Skoo'-kum~, or ~Skoo-koom'~, _n., adj._ Chihalis, SKUKUM. _A ghost; an
evil spirit or demon; strong._ Skookum tumtum, _brave;_ skookum chuck, _a
rapid._

~Skwak'-wal~, _n._ Chinook, SKAKULH (Anderson); Clatsop, SKAKOLI. _A
lamprey eel._ Of local use only.

~Skwis'-kwis~, _n._ Chinook, Cathlamet dialect. _A squirrel._

~Sla-hal'~, _n._ Chinook, ETLALTLAL. _A game played with ten small disks,
one of which is marked._

~Smet'-ocks~, _n._ Chihalis, SMETTAKS. _The large clam (Lutraria)._ Used
only at the mouth of the Columbia river.

~Smoke~, _n._ English, idem. _Smoke; clouds; fog; steam._

~Snass~, _n._ Quaere u. d. _Rain._ Cole snass, _snow._ The word is neither
Chinook nor Chihalis, and is perhaps manufactured.

~Snow~, _n._ English, idem. _Snow._

~Soap~, _n._ English, idem. _Soap._

~So-le'-mie~, _n._ Chinook, SULAMICH (Anderson); Clatsop, SHOeLBE. _The
cranberry._

~Sol'-leks~, or ~Sah'-leks~, _n., adj._ Quaere u. d. _Anger; angry._ Mamook
solleks, _to fight;_ tikegh solleks, _to be hostile;_ kumtuks solleks, _to
be passionate._

~So'-pe-na~, _v._ Chinook, T'SOPENA. _To jump; to leap._

~Spo'-oh~, or ~Spo'-eh~, _adj._ Chinook, idem. _Faded; any light color,_
as pale blue, drab, &c. Chahko spoeh, _to fade._

~Spoon~, _n._ English, idem. _A spoon._

~Spose~, _conj._ English, SUPPOSE. _If; supposing; provided that; in order
that._ Spose mika nanitsh nika canim, _if you see my canoe;_ spose nika
klatawa kopa Chinook, _if or when I go to Chinook;_ kahkwa spose, _as if._
See KLOSHK SPOSE.

~Stick~, _n., adj._ English, idem. _A stick; a tree; wood; wooden._ Stick
skin, _bark;_ ship stick, _a mast;_ mitwhit stick, _a standing tree,_ icht
stick, _a yard measure;_ stick shoes, _leather shoes or boots,_ as
distinguished from skin shoes or moccasins; kull stick, _oak_ (hard wood);
isick stick, _the ash_ (paddle wood).

~Stock'-en~, _n._ English. _Stockings or socks._

~Stoh~, _adj._ Chinook, idem. _Loose._ Mamook stoh, _to untie; unloose;
undo._ Metaphorically, _to absolve._

~Stone~, _n._ English, idem. _A rock or stone; bone; horn; the testicles._
Stone kiuatan, _a stallion;_ mahsh stone, _to castrate._

~Stote'-kin~, _adj._ Chinook, STOKTKIN. _Eight._

~Stutch'-un~, _n._ English, STURGEON. _The sturgeon._

~Suk-wal'-al~, _n._ Chinook (Hale); Clatsop, SHUKWALALA, _a gun or
musket._ No longer used in Jargon.

~Sun~, _n._ English, idem. _The sun; a day._ Tenas sun, _early;_ sitkum
sun, _noon;_ klip sun, _sunset._

~Sun'-day~, _n._ English, idem. _Sunday._ Icht Sunday, _a week;_ hyas
sunday, _a holiday._ A flag hoisted on a particular occasion is sometimes
also called Sunday. The other days of the week are usually counted from
this; as, icht, mokst, klone sun kopet Sunday, _one, two, or three days
after Sunday._ Saturday used to be called at the Hudson's Bay Company's
posts "muckamuck sun," _food day,_ as the one on which the rations were
issued.


T.

~Tagh'-um~, ~To'-hum~, or ~Tugh'-um~, _adj._ Chinook, TAKHUM; Cowlitz,
TUKHUM; Kwantlen, TUKHUM'; Selish, TAKKAN. _Six._

~Tahl-kie~, or ~Tahnl-kie~, _adv._ Chinook, TANLKI. _Yesterday._ Icht
tahlkie, _day before yesterday._

~Tah-nim~, _v._ Chihalis, idem. _To measure._ Of only local use, and not
strictly Jargon.

~Taht'-le-lum~, or ~Tot'-le-lum~, _adj._ Chinook, TATLELUM. _Ten._ The
combinations from this are simple. Moxt, klone, &c., tahtlelum, signifying
_twenty, thirty,_ &c.; tahtlelum pe icht, &c., _eleven, twelve, &c._

~Tal-a-pus~, _n._ Chinook, ITALIPAS; Yakama, TELIPA. (Pandosy.) _The
coyote or prairie wolf._ A sort of deity or supernatural being, prominent
in Indian mythology. _A sneak._

~Ta-mah-no-us~, _n._ Chinook, ITAMANAWAS. _A sort of guardian or familiar
spirit; magic; luck; fortune; any thing supernatural._ One's particular
forte is said to be his _tamahnous._ Mamook tamahnous, _to conjure; "make
medecine;"_ masahchie tamahnous, _witchcraft or necromancy._ Mr. Andersen
restricts the true meaning of the word to _conjuring._

~Ta-mo'-litsh~, or ~Ta-mow'-litsh~, _n._ Chinook, TAMULITSH (Anderson);
Yakama, TAMOLITSH (Pandosy). _A tub; barrel; bucket._ Icht tamolitsb, _a
bushel measure._

~Tanse~, _v., n._ English, DANCE. _To dance._

~T'chuk'-in~, or ~Tsugh'-ken~. See CHUCKIN.

~Tea~, _n._ English, idem. _Tea._

~Te-ah-wit~, _n._ Chinook, TIAWI; Clatsop, KLAAWIT. _The leg; the foot._
Klatawa teahwit, _to go on foot; to walk;_ klook teahwit, _lame._

~Teh-teh~, _v._ Clatsop, TETEHAHA. _To trot,_ as a horse. Of local use
only.

~Ten'-as~, or ~Tan'-as~, _n., adj._ Nootka, TANAS; Tokwaht, TENES. _Small;
few; little; a child; the young of any animal._ Mokst nika tenas, _I have
two children;_ tenas hyiu, _a few;_ tenas sun, _early._ Jewitt gives
TANASSIE for _a child_ in Nootka.

~Te-peh~, _n._ Chinook, TEPKEH. _Quills; the wings of a bird._

~Tik-egh~, or ~Tu-kegh~, _v._ Chinook, TIKEKH. _To want; wish; love;
like._ Hyas tikegh, _to long for;_ ikta mika tikegh? _what do you want?_

~Tik'-tik~, _n._ By onoma. _A watch._

~Til'-i-kum~, _n._ Chinook, TILIKHUM. _People._ Applied generally, it
means those who are not chiefs. Cultus tilikum, _common or insignificant
persons;_ huloima tilikum, _strangers;_ nika tilikum, _my relations._ It
is also used to signify a _tribe_ or _band._

~Til'-i-kum-ma-ma~, _n._ (Hale.) Chinook, TLKAMAMA. _A father._ The word
is not in use in Jargon.

~Till~, or ~Tull~, _adj., n._ English, TIRE. _Tired; heavy; weight; a
weight._ Hyas till nika, _I am very tired;_ kansih till okook, _how much
does that weigh;_ mamook till, _to weigh._

~Tin'-tin~, _n._ By onoma. _A bell; a musical instrument._ Mamook tintin,
_to ring a bell._ Among the Indians round the Hudson Bay Company's posts,
the hours were thus known; as, mokst tintin kopet sitkum sun, _two hours,_
i.e., _two bells after noon._

~T'kope~, _adj._ Chinook, idem. _White; light-colored._

~Tlehl~. See KLALE.

~Tl'kope~, _v._ Chinook, idem. _To cut; hew; chop._

~Toh~, or ~Tooh~. By onoma. Mamook toh, _to spit._ A manufactured word.

~Toke-tie~, _adj._ Kalapuya. _Pretty._ Not in common use.

~To'-lo~, _v._ Kalapuya. _To earn; to win at a game; to gain._ Kansih
dolla nika tolo spose mamook? _how many dollars will I earn if I work?_

~To'-luks~, _n._ Clallam, TOYUK. _The mussel._ Used on Puget Sound only.

~To-mol-la~, _adv._ English, TO-MORROW. Ikt tomolla, _or_ copet tomolla,
_the day after._

~Tot~, _n._ Chihalis, TOT, or TAT. _An uncle._

~To'-to~, _v._ By onoma. Chinook, TOKH-TOKH. _To shake; sift any thing;
winnow._

~To-toosh'~, or ~Ta-toosh'~, _n._ Chippeway, TOTOSH. (Schoolcraft.) _The
breasts of a female; milk._ Totoosh lakles, _butter._

~To-wagh'~, _adj._ Chinook, TOWAKH. _Bright; shining; light._

~Tsee~, _adj._ Chinook, idem. _Sweet._

~Tsee'-pie~, _v._ Kalapuya. _To miss a mark; to mistake one's road; to
make a blunder in speaking; to err or blunder._ Tseepie wayhut, _to take
the wrong road._

~Tshi'-ke~, _adv._ (Hale.) Quaere u. d. _Directly; soon._ Not Jargon.

~Tshis~, _adj._ Chinook, idem. _Cold._ Not in common use.

~Tsi-at-ko~, _n._ Chihalis, Nisqually, &c., idem; Clatsop, ECHIATKU. _A
nocturnal demon,_ much feared by the Indians. The Skagits give this name
to the "Couteaux," a tribe of Indians on Frazer River, of whom they stand
in like awe.

~Tsik'-tsik~, or ~Tchik'-tchik~, _n._ By onoma. _A wagon; a cart; a
wheel._ Tsiktsik wayhut, _a wagon-road._

~Tsil'-tsil~, or ~Chil'-chil~, _n._ Chinook, ECHILCHIL. (Anderson.)
_Buttons; the stars._

~Tsish~, _v._ By onoma., in imitation of the sound of a grindstone.
(Shaw.) Mamook tsish, _to sharpen._ Of local use.

~Tsole-pat~, _n._ Klikatat. _A shot-pouch._ Of local use only.

~Tso'-lo~, _n._ Kalapuya. (Shaw.) _To wander in the dark; to lose one's
way._ Used in the Willamette valley.

~Tsugh~, _n., v._ Chinook, idem. _A crack or split._ Mamook tsugh, _to
split;_ chahko tsugh, _to become split or cracked,_ as by the heat of the
sun; mamook tsugh illahie, is by some used instead of klugh, for _to
plough._

~Tsuk~. See CHUCK.

~Tuk-a-mo'-nuk~, or ~Tak-a-mo'-nak~, _adj._ Chinook, ITAKAMONAK. _A
hundred._ It is, like ten, combined with the digits; as, icht, moxt, klone
takamonak, _one hundred, two hundred, three hundred,_ &c. Hyas takamonak,
_or_ tahtlelum takamonak, _a thousand._

~Tuk'-wil-la~, or ~To'-kwil-la~, _n._ Kalapuya. _The hazel-nut; nuts
generally._

~Tum'-tum~, _n._ By onoma., from the pulsations of the heart. (Anderson.)
_The heart; the will; opinion._ Mahsh tumtum, _to give orders,_ mamook
tumtum, _to make up one's mind;_ mamook closhe tumtum, _to make friends or
peace;_ sick tumtum, _grief; jealousy;_ moxt tumtum nika, _I am
undecided,_ i.e., _I have two wills. Q._  Kah nesika klatawa? _where shall
we go? A._  Mika tumtum, _wherever you please; as you will._ Ikta mika
tumtum? _what do you think?_ Halo tumtum, _without a will of one's own,_
as a child. The heart seems to be generally regarded as the seat of the
mind or will.

~Tum-wa'-ta~, _n._ TUM, by onoma.; English, WATER. _A waterfall, cascade,
or cataract._ Lewis and Clarke give TIMM as used by the Indians above the
Dalles of the Columbia in directing them to the falls.

~Tup'-shin~, or ~Tip'-sin~, _v._ Chihalis, TUPSHIN. _A needle._ Mamook
tipsin, _to sew; to mend; to patch._

~Tup-so~, or ~Tip'-so~, _n._ Chinook, TEPSO, _a leaf._ _Grass; leaves,
fringe; feathers; fur._ Often but incorrectly employed for YAKSO, _hair;_
tipso illahie, _prairie;_ dely tipso, _hay._

~Ty'-ee~, _n., adj._ Nootka, TAIYI; TYEE (Jewitt). _A chief._ Any thing of
superior order. Saghalie tyee, _the Deity;_ tyee salmon, _the spring
salmon._ TOYON is given by some of the northwestern voyagers as the Eskimo
appellation for _chief._

~Tzum~, _n., adj._ Chinook, idem. _Mixed colors; spots or stripes; a mark
or figure; writing; paint; painted._ Tzum sill, _printed calico;_ tzum
pehpa, _writing;_ mamook tzum, _to write;_ tzum illahie, _blazed or
surveyed land._


~W.~

~Wagh~, _v._ Chinook, WAKH, _To pour; to spill; to vomit._ Mamook wagh
chuck, _pour out some water._

~Wake~, _adv._ Nootka, WIK (Jewitt); Tokwaht, WEK. _No; not._

~Wa'-ki~, _adv._ (Hale.) Chinook, WAKI. _To-morrow._ Not Jargon.

~Wap'-pa-too~, _n._ Quaere u. d. _The root of the Sagitaria sagittifolia,_
which forms an article of food; _the potato._ The word is neither Chinook
nor Chihalis, but is everywhere in common use.

~Wash~, _v._ English, idem. Mamook wash, _to wash._

~Waum~, _adj._ English, WARM. Hyas waum, _hot;_ waum illahie, _summer;_
mamook waum, _to heat;_ waum-sick-cole-sick, _fever and ague._

~Wau'-wau~, _v., n._ Nootka; Nittinat, WAWE. _To talk; speak; call; ask;
tell; answer; talk or conversation._ Cultus wauwau, _idle talk; stuff;
nonsense;_ hyas wauwau, _to shout._

~Way'-hut~, ~Hweh'-kut~, or ~Wee'-hut~, _n._ Chinook, WEHUT, _a road;_
Yakama, WIET, _far._ _A road or trail._ Tsik-tsik wayhut, _a wagon-road._
About Vancouver, on the Columbia, it is pronounced HWEHKUT; on Puget
Sound, WEEHUT.

~Weght~, _conj._ Chinook, idem. _Again; also; more._ Pe nika weght, _and I
too;_ pahtlatsh weght, _give me some more;_ tenas weght, _a little more
yet._

~Whim~, _v._ Wasco. (Shaw.) _To fell._ Whim stick, _a fallen tree;_ mamook
whim okook stick, _fell that tree._ Also, _to throw,_ in wrestling. Of
local use only.

~Win'-a-pie~, _adv._ Nootka; Nittinat, WILAPI. _By-and-bye; presently;
wait._ Of local use; the Chinook ALKI being more common.

~Wind~, or ~Win~, _n._ English, idem. _Wind._ The winds are often known by
the country from which they blow; as, for instance, on the Columbia, an
easterly is a Walla-walla wind; at the mouth of the river, a southerly is
a Tilamooks wind, &c. _Breath._ Ex. Halo wind, _out of breath; dead._


Y.

~Yah'-hul~, _n._ Chinook, YAKHUL; EUEKHOL. _A name._ Not in general use.

~Yah-ka~, or ~Yok'-ka~, _pron._ Chinook, YAKA. _He; his; him; she; it,
&c._

~Yah'-kis-ilt'h~, _adj._ Chinook, YAKISILT'H. _Sharp._ Mr. Anderson gives
as the original, "_cutting._"

~Yah'-wa~, _adv._ Chinook, YAWAKH. _There; thither; thence; beyond._

~Yah'-whul~. See AYAHWHUL.

~Yak'-so~, _n._ Chinook, idem. _The hair of the head; hair generally._

~Ya-kwah'-tin~, or ~Kwah'-tin~, _n._ Chinook and Clatsop, YAKWATIN. _The
belly; the entrails._

~Yaub~. See LEJAUB.

~Yel'-a-kwat~. See KALAKWAHTIE.

~Yi'-em~, _v., n._ Chihalis, YAIEM. _To relate; to tell a story; to
confess to a priest; a story or tale._

~Youtl~, _adj._ Quaere Chihalis, EYUTLH; Nisqually, JUIL, _glad._ _Pleased;
proud;_ (of a horse), _spirited._ Hyas youtl yakka tumtum, _his heart is
very glad; he is much puffed up._

~Youtl-kut~, _adj., n._ Chinook, YUTLKUT. _Long_ (in dimension); _length._

~Yout-skut~, or ~Yutes'-kut~, _adj._ Chinook, YUTSKUTA. _Short_ (in
dimension).

~Y-salt'h~, or ~Ye-salt'h~. See E-SALT'H.

~Yuk'-wa~, _adv._ Chinook, YAKWA. _Here; hither; this side of; this way._
Yukwa kopa okook house, _this side of that house._

